= Development Notes

== FIXME

=== file://lib/pom/gemspec.rb

* FIXME: this only works b/c of package staging
distribute = Dir.glob('**/*')
distribute = project.filelist
distribute = manifest #.files (25)

== DEPRECATE

=== file://lib/pom/release_notes.rb

* DEPRECATE: We will use improved History file instead. (8)

=== file://lib/pom/metadata.rb

* DEPRECATE package (72)
* DEPRECATE: (should be indicated by version number) (297)

== TODO

=== file://lib/pom/gemspec.rb

* TODO: bin/ is a POM convention, is there are reason to do otherwise? (74)
* TODO: make test_files configurable (?) (107)

=== file://lib/pom/history.rb

* TODO: Allow the format to be more varied. (26)

=== file://lib/pom/metadata.rb

* TODO: method_missing (6)
* TODO: extecutables is not right. (7)
* TODO: move to ReadMe class?
@data['description'] ||= readme.description
@data['license']     ||= readme.license (138)
* TODO: See if there is not a better way to do this... is lazy loading worth it? (163)
* TODO: Better term then namespace? (293)
* TODO: Tecnically these next two are not metadata but build
configuration, so ultimately they should go else where.
But where? (390)
* TODO: Improve buildno support ? (578)
* TODO: Use String#to_list instead (?) (685)

=== file://lib/pom/readme.rb

* TODO: Perhaps this should be in Metadata, and then we can if we want
have this method too, but calling on it? (138)

=== file://lib/pom/project.rb

* TODO: Support alternate source directory (?) (101)
* TODO: Deprecate in favor of using manifest.file ? (138)
* TODO: Support alternate source location in the future (?) (152)
* TODO: Add name to end of path ? (327)
* TODO: Don't use README, or make it an option. (387)
